+++
date = 2022-10-07
isPopular = false
tags = ["python", "DevOps", "work environment"]
thumbnailPath = "self/img/articles/2020-08-15-poetry/thumb.jpeg" 
title = "Manage your python-dependancies with Poetry"
+++
Another daily hassel for python developers is to have their packages under control.
Python, unlike other programming languages lacks of solid package management tool.
pip provides some basic functionality, but still does not have necessary version and 
dependency management capabilities, required for mission critical python projects.
As a consequence, there are several issues that might occur in your production environment.
In this article I will discuss the most critical issues and give some thoughts how they
can be avoided using `poetry`.

### Version divergence issue
Depending on team size the one pythong project is usually maintained by several developers.
The scrum-master/team lead prepares tasks for the sprint/iteration (if you work in agile).
and distributes the tasks among developers.
For simplicity lets consider the following example project stucture:
```bash
my-flask-app
    |--static/
       |--css/
          |--main.css
    |--templates/
       |--index.html
       |--products.html
    |--models.py
    |--views.py
    |--requirements.txt
```
where the requirements.txt would like:
```shell
Flask~=2.*
requests~=1.*
```
And now imagine, that before starting, the developer decides to run 
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
``` 
to refresh the packages.
The result of this comand will update the packages in his local environment.

```bash
Flask==2.0.1 -> Flask==2.2.3
requests==1.8.1 -> requests==1.9.2
```

Now, after developing the changes, he pushes his changes to CI server, the server
builds the packages, runs the auto tests, stores the artifacts and notifies the QA team that
the task is ready for testing.
The QA engineer pulls the code, starts the manual regression tests and realises that
some of the features are not working on *his machine*. He reports the problem and moves
the ticket back to *development*.
The developer tries to reproduce problem, but could not and reports back to QA engineer,
with something like 

```
"I followed all your instructions, but could not reproduce the problem, 
could you please come over or provide more details?"
```
or even worse

```
"everything works on my machine, please check again"
```
Hopefully, after a few iterations of such a ping-pong in *Jira* they realise that 
they need to check the packages they installed in their `.venv`.
Apparently, the QA engineer still has the old packages:
```shell
Flask==2.0.1
requests==1.8.1
```
while the developer has  
```shell
Flask==2.2.3
requests==1.9.2
```
and the newly developed feature is using the functionality of the new `requests` lib, 
thus breaks without the updates.
The QA engineer updates the packages, approves the changes and moves the ticket to DevOps
engineer for deployment. 
The production was not affected, however a bunch of hours were wasted on figuring out the 
root cause of the problem.

And, as usual, it could be worse. Particularly, in my own practise, I have seen clusters
of production machines serving the customers, where each machine had slightly different 
sets of packages. 
This kind of setup works *"fine"*, until it breaks, with really long running 
consequences and some reputation lost.
Therefore, it is *tremendously important* to keep your packages and their versions 
under control.

### Control your package with Poetry
Poetry is a beautifull instrument that provides and extensive control over your python
packages:
- controls the list of packages
- separates the dev dependancies from production dependancies  
- resolves the packages dependencies
- stores the hash of all installed packages and their versions

Poetry leverages the `pyproject.toml` file where the list of dependencies can be defined.
```shell
[tool.poetry]
name = "my-flask-app"
version = "0.3.0"
description = "My amazin flask app"
authors = [
    "john.snow <john.snow21212230@gmai.com>",
    "gourgen.mardirossian <gougou.mardirossian45112@gmail.com>"
]

[tool.poetry.dependencies]
Flask ~= "2.2.*"
requests ~= "1.9.*"

[tool.poetry.dev-dependencies]
black = "^21.6b0"
flake8 = "^3.9.2"
pylint = "^2.8.3"
pytest-mock = "^3.6.1"
Pympler = "^0.9"

[build-system]
requires = ["poetry-core>=1.0.0"]
build-backend = "poetry.core.masonry.api"
```










