+++
date = 2022-10-07
isPopular = false
tags = ["python", "DevOps", "work environment"]
thumbnailPath = "/self/img/articles/2020-08-07-pyenv/thumb.jpeg" 
title = "Resovle python installemnts hassle with Pyenv"
+++

In our daily work we usually deal with multiple python projects that we maintain.
It's usually the case that those projects have slightly different python versions.
Some of the projects get the frequent updates, some of them might sit somewhere in 
your hard drive with old, but good python3.7 waiting for the developer to update the version. 

The management of the python versions was always a hassle. 
Especially when it comes to the virtualenvs.
In a typical scenario, when developer starts a project he/she creates a folder, and adds
an nested `.venv` or `venv` directory inside of the project folder, where the virtual
environment files will be stored. The python version, installed packages will all nest
in that folder.

After a while the list of the existing projects extends and the virtual environments go
out fo control. Which python version is used for the project? 
Which packages are installed? Does the python version needs to be updated?
In order to answer these questions developer would neeed to iterate over all of the folders
and run corresponding commands in terminal.

To solve the python versioning hassle, virtual environment issues I highly recommend to
use *pyenv*.

### Key benefits: 
- you can install any python version available in pypi at your machine
- time saving: you do not need to care about the installation process, pyevn will do everything for you
- manages virtualenvironments- it is a single tool to add manage both the python version
as well as the virtualenvironments.
- allows to list all existing virtual environemnts and relate to corresponding projects

### How to install
To install the main package run
```shell
brew install pyenv
```
and the the virtualenv manager
```shell
brew install pyenv-virtualenv
```

Add to ~/.bash_profile 
```shell

eval "$(pyenv init -)"
eval "$(pyenv virtualenv-init -)"
```

### The useful commands
List all available python versions
```shell
pyenv install --list
```

Install specific python version (the python will be installed in ~/.pyenv/versions)
```shell
pyenv install 3.5.5
```

Uninstall python version
```shell
pyenv uninstall 2.7.15
```

Show commands
```shell
pyenv commands
```

Show all installed versions
```shell
pyenv versions
```

Show current active version
```shell
pyenv version
```


Show the full path to the binary
```shell
pyenv which pip
```


Set local python version (creates .python-version)
```shell
pyenv local 3.4.5
```

VIrtualenv
Create a virtualenv
```shell
pyenv virtualenv 3.5.5 project1
```

Activate an environment 
```shell
pyenv virtualenv 3.5.5 project1

cd project1

# will activate the virtualenv (if you cd out of the project dir virtualenv will be different)
pyenv local project1
```

Activate the environment
```shell
pyenv activate venv
```
Deactivate the environment
```shell
pyenv deactivate venv
```

List the virtual environments
```shell
pyenv virtualenvs
```

To see which pip is used
```shell
pyenv which pip
```









